docs: how to use MUD from onchain code (#1360)
latticexyz/mud: docs/pages/tutorials/minimal/use-onchain.mdx

# Use MUD from onchain code

In this tutorial you learn how to use a `World` and the systems in it from code that runs on the blockchain.
You can use this knowledge to add sub-systems to a `World` or to use MUD as part of a bigger dapp.

## Setup

[Create a minimal application](../minimal) and run it.

> ## Use the `World` from Foundry

Reviewer: I feel like a much easier way to interact with a MUD contract from the CLI would be to write a simple forge script (https://book.getfoundry.sh/reference/forge/forge-script) and execute it via the CLI. The actual code would be similar to the functions you're executing via `cast` here, but it would be much less cluttered. 

The thing I want to avoid is that people read this and think it's very complicated to interact with MUD contracts, while there would be a much easier to understand recommended method.

Another thing we can do would be to add a simple CLI command to the MUD cli to read table values that automatically requests the table's schema and handles the encoding/decoding.

   ```

   The error message should be similar to:

   ```
   (code: 3, message: execution reverted, data: Some(String("0x")))
   ```

<details>

<summary>Explanation of `src/OnchainClient.sol`</summary>

Let's go over the contract source code (`src/OnchainClient.sol`).

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity >=0.8.0;

import { Counter } from "codegen/Tables.sol";
import { IWorld } from "codegen/world/IWorld.sol";
```

We import `Counter` and `IWorld` from the code that was generated using `mud codegen`.
The entire `src/codegen` directory is copied [from the template](https://github.com/latticexyz/mud/tree/main/templates/vanilla/packages/contracts/src/codegen) into the new application's `lib` directory.

```solidity
contract OnchainClient {
  IWorld immutable world;

  constructor(address world_) {
    world = IWorld(world_);
  }
```

Define a variable to hold the address of the `World`.
The constructor receives the value for it.

```solidity
function readCounter() public view returns (uint32) {
  return Counter.get(world);
}
```

To get the value of the counter we use the `Counter` library we imported from `codegen/Tables.sol`.

> There are two versions of `get` in that library.

Reviewer: How was this table created? I think it would be helpful if the example project included a `mud.config.ts` to generate this or other table libraries

# Use MUD from onchain code

> In this tutorial you learn how to use a `World` and the systems in it from code that runs on the blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial you will learn how to use a `World` and the systems in it from Solidity code (via forge scripts in your command line or via deployed contracts).
```

> You can use this knowledge to add sub-systems to a `World` or to use MUD as part of a bigger dapp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use this knowledge to add sub-systems to a `World` or to access MUD state in contracts outside the `World`.
```

    uint256 myPrivateKey = vm.envUint("PRIVATE_KEY");

    // Start broadcasting transactions from that account
    vm.startBroadcast(myPrivateKey);
```

Read the private key from the environment (which includes the content of the `.env` file) and use it to issue transactions.

```solidity
    // Connect to the world using `WORLD_ADDR` from .env
    console.log("Connecting to world at ", vm.envAddress("WORLD_ADDR"));
    world = IWorld(vm.envAddress("WORLD_ADDR"));
```

Connect to the `World` at `WORLD_ADDR`.

```solidity
    console.log("The counter values is now ", Counter.get(world));

    console.log("Incrementing the counter");
    world.increment();

    console.log("The counter values is now ", Counter.get(world));
```

This is the actual script.
Note that it has access to `Counter.get(world)` to read the data, but to modify it you have to go through a `System`.
Remember, _there are no secrets on the blockchain_ and therefore we can assume that anybody can read anything at any time after it is posted - so we might as well provide read access directly.

<details>

<summary>Try to bypass security</summary>

> There is another script `BypassSecurity`, which attempts to bypass the `System` logic and set `Counter` directly.

Reviewer: Should we call this script `AttemptBypassSecurity`? 😄

You can run it with this command.

```sh copy
forge script --rpc-url http://localhost:8545 --broadcast script/ScriptClient.s.sol:BypassSecurity
```

> It fails with this error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It fails with this error, because we don't have the necessary access rights to write to the `Counter` table:
```

```
== Logs ==
  Connecting to world at  0x5FbDB2315678afecb367f032d93F642f64180aa3
  Just before trying to reset the counter
Error:

> e64c0348:ROOT_NAMESPACE/Counter

Reviewer: The error here is `AccessDenied`. Sad that forge is not able to display that properly, but maybe we can mention it here?

```

This is the relevant portion of the code.

```solidity
    // Try to set `Counter` directly. See that it fails.
    console.log("Just before trying to reset the counter");
    Counter.set(world, 0);
    console.log("Just after trying to reset the counter");
```

We know the the failure happens in the `Counter.set(world, 0);` line because we see the log entry for the line before it, but not the one for the line immediately after it.

</details>

```solidity

>     // Stop broadcasting transactions from te account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Stop broadcasting transactions from the account
```

    vm.stopBroadcast();
  }
}
```

Finally, stop broadcasting transactions using the private key.

</details>

## Use the `World` from a contract

You can use the contract [in the examples directory](https://github.com/latticexyz/mud/tree/main/examples/onchain-client).

1. Read the environment variables.

   ```sh copy
   . .env
   ```

1. Deploy the sample contact.

   ```sh copy
   forge create OnchainClient --private-key $PRIVATE_KEY --constructor-args $WORLD_ADDR
   ```

> 1. Set `CLIENT_ADDR` to the address to which the contract is deployed.

Reviewer: Where should they set this? In the `.env` file? (Also let's use `CLIENT_ADDRESS`)

1. Get the value of `Counter` from the client.

   ```sh copy
   cast call $CLIENT_ADDR "readCounter()"
   ```

1. Increment `Counter` and read the value again.
   See it is one more.

   ```sh copy
   cast send --private-key $PRIVATE_KEY $CLIENT_ADDR "add1()"
   cast call $CLIENT_ADDR "readCounter()"
   ```

1. Attempt to reset the counter, which bypasses the `System` logic and modifies `Counter` directly.

>    See that this attempt fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   See that this attempt fails, since our contract doesn't have the necessary access rights to write to the `Counter` table.
```

```

We import `Counter` and `IWorld` from the code that was generated using `mud codegen`.

```solidity
contract OnchainClient {
  IWorld immutable world;

  constructor(address world_) {
    world = IWorld(world_);
  }
```

Define a variable to hold the address of the `World`.
The constructor receives the value for it.

```solidity
function readCounter() public view returns (uint32) {
  return Counter.get(world);
}
```

To get the value of the counter we use the `Counter` library we imported from `codegen/Tables.sol`.
There are two versions of `get` in that library.

[This version](https://github.com/latticexyz/mud/blob/230822-use-onchain/examples/onchain-client/lib/codegen/tables/Counter.sol#L60-L66) reads from the `World` of which it is a part.
It is the version you use in a `System` deployed to that `World`.

[This version](https://github.com/latticexyz/mud/blob/230822-use-onchain/examples/onchain-client/lib/codegen/tables/Counter.sol#L68-L74) gets a parameter which is the address of the `World`.
It is the version you use in code which is not part of the `World` with the relevant table.

```
  function add1() public {
    world.increment();
  }
```

> When a `System` is in the root namespace of a `World`, its functions are available from the `World` itself.
> This is the way to activate the logic in a `System`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a `System` is in the root namespace of a `World`, its functions are available from the `World` itself, so we can call the function on the `World` to execute the `System` logic.
```

```
  function reset() public {
    Counter.set(world, 0);
  }
}
```

This function attempts to bypass the `System` logic and set the counter value directly.

> As you have already seen, it fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you have already seen, it fails because the contract doesn't have the necessary access rights to write to the `Counter` table.
```

</details>

## Setting up a Foundry project for MUD access

The example is already set up for MUD access, but these are the steps you do to add it to other Foundry projects.

1. Create the Foundry project.

   ```sh copy
   forge init
   ```

1. At the root of the Foundry project, create a Node project for the libraries.
   Solidity libraries are usually published as [npm packages](https://www.npmjs.com/) and ours are no exception.

   ```sh copy
   pnpm init

>    pnpm install @latticexyz/world@next @latticexyz/store@next @latticexyz/schema-type@next @latticexyz/cli

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   pnpm install @latticexyz/world@next @latticexyz/store@next @latticexyz/schema-type@next @latticexyz/cli@next
```
